welcome back to videojug and the food
for all series my name is Pippa author
of the intolerant gourmet and in this
episode I'm going to show you how to
make gluten-free dairy-free egg-free
baked falafel in lettuce bitter with
maple tahini dressing
first step of this recipe is all really
simple we're going to use a food
processor and we're just going to blitz
it all together and that takes any of
the faff out of finally chopping the
chickpeas so we have a tin of chickpeas
drained and rinsed we place those into
the food processor
next is two teaspoons of garlic oil I
like to use garlic oil because it's got
a subtler flavor than raw garlic cloves
and and as you're just going to bake
this from fresh it makes a real
difference and we've got half a red
onion roughly chopped just throw it in
there and a little bit again roughly
chopped flat-leaf parsley for a full
list of ingredients just check the
description box and next we're going to
add 1/2 a teaspoon of baking powder
this just helps give the falafel a tiny
little bit of which is what you want and
then we've got a mixture of herbs and
spices or spices we've got smoked
paprika which adds a lovely smoky flavor
we've got cumin and we've got coriander
and a pinch of sea salt finally we add
two teaspoons of your favorite sauce
this can be chili jam or it could be
tahini or it could be a hot sauce it's
whatever you favor it just adds a nice
bit of depth and flavor it won't
overpower the falafel but it's a nice
addition and then we just pulse it you
want the chickpeas to become really
finely chopped you might have to scrape
down the sides that points just to make
sure that everything's binding together
you wanted to be a paste but with a bit
of texture so a court case would be a
good description and as I said we'll
just scrape down the sides that's just
to make sure that you've got any loose
bits and pieces mixed in
then one last clip you'll be able to
smell already the spice mixture which
although really simple is got a great
kind of Ottoman like Moroccan Persian
flavor so we get a mixing bowl and we'll
just wipe down the blade get that out of
the way and take the falafel paste which
is what it is at the moment and just
scrape it in the next step is so
incredibly easy you just want to bind
your falafel mixture so you're adding a
flat but obviously we want gluten-free
flour and this is where gram flour comes
in gram flour chickpea flour you can use
it to make soccer which is a French
bread and you can also use it in pancake
mixtures or baking but of course it's
perfect for falafel because it's
chickpeas and tickets so we take our
gram flour
I'd say three to four tablespoons but it
really depends on how much moisture is
in your chickpeas and how moist the
mixture is so you want it to be bound
together so we'll start with three and
then stir together and see what kind of
texture it is you just want it to still
help be slightly tacky but hold together
nicely so that you can shape it into
little patties and for this recipe we're
going to bake the falafel which isn't
your usual option normally we fry
fluffle and you could do with this
mixture as well but I prefer to do in
the oven I think it's got a nice flavor
and although looks a little less golden
tastes just as delicious so that's four
table spoons of gram flour and then
you'll see that the mixture is holding
together but still a paste and this is
about right we're taking about a walnut
sized amount and we're just going to
you'll see that it's quite tacky
that's totally fine if you have a
problem with it just all your hands with
a little bit of olive oil and that will
help them slide off and again we're
going to put them on an oiled baking
tray to cook so to shape it into a
little ball and then place it on your
baking tray and you can flatten it
slightly but really you just want them
to be like little mini patties and they
won't spread when you bake them so you
can put them quite place together so I'm
just going to carry on making these
falafel until we've used all the mixture
up put it on the baking tray and then
it's into the oven at 200 degrees for
about 25 to 30 minutes
so our falafel are out of the oven
they've been in there around 30 minutes
and I flip them over halfway through
just so that they Brown evenly you'll
see that they brown top to bottom rather
than around the edges but it's all crisp
because of the gram flour inside them so
we'll let those cool for a little bit
and then we're going to make our tahini
maple dressing so in this bowl I've got
a really simple mixture of maple syrup
and he knead into that we're going to
add the juice of half a lemon and
depending on the size or the juiciness
of your lemons you can add a little bit
more a little bit less dressings or
sauces are so much to your own taste so
trust your instinct if you like the way
it tastes and the texture then go with
that so stir the lemon juice in just
until it's combined and then we have
about a tablespoon of garlic oil and
again that adds a really nice it's
intense garlic but it doesn't burn you
like raw garlic would so it's a good
combination to have and just stir that
through until it's all emulsified oh
there's our tahini maple dressing made
you can see it's really glossy and thick
and perfect for going into the lettuce
pitter with the falafel so play
two or three of the bait falafel into
your lettuce cup
let's do three for this and if you have
any chopped tomato or chopped avocado or
extra fresh herbs you can add those at
this point the more color the better
really grated beetroot all sorts and
then we spoon over a little bit of the
tahini and maple dressing which acts as
a kind of source for your pitter and
then you have if I show you you curve up
the lettuce cups like this and you have
a ready-made pitter for your falafel or
for kebabs or a burger perfect
summertime food I'm going to go and
enjoy this and hope to see you next time
in the food for all series
you